---
page_title: 'Plugin Development - Framework: Schemas'
description: >-
  How to define a schema using the provider development framework. Schemas
  specify the constraints of Terraform configuration blocks.
---

# Schemas

Schemas specify the constraints of Terraform configuration blocks. They define what fields a provider,
resource, or data source configuration block has, and give Terraform metadata
about those fields. You can think of the schema as the "type information" or
the "shape" of a resource, data source, or provider.

[The
`tfsdk.Schema`
struct](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-framework/tfsdk#Schema)
defines schemas that are returned from methods on the
[provider](/plugin/framework/providers),
[resources](/plugin/framework/resources), and [data
sources](/plugin/framework/data-sources).

## Version

Every schema has a version, which is an integer that allows you to track changes to your schemas. It is generally only used when
[upgrading resource state](/plugin/framework/resources/state-upgrade), to help massage resources created with earlier
schemas into the shape defined by the current schema. It will never be used for
provider or data source schemas and can be omitted.

## DeprecationMessage

Not every resource, data source, or provider will be supported forever.
Sometimes designs change or APIs are deprecated. Schemas that have their
`DeprecationMessage` property set will display that message as a warning when
that provider, data source, or resource is used. A good message will tell
practitioners that the provider, resource, or data source is deprecated, and
will indicate a migration strategy.

## Description

Various tooling like
[terraform-plugin-docs](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-docs) and
the [language server](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-ls) can use
metadata in the schema to generate documentation or offer a better editor
experience for practitioners. Use the `Description` property to add a description of a resource, data source, or provider that these tools can leverage.

## MarkdownDescription

Similar to the `Description` property, the `MarkdownDescription` is used to
provide a markdown-formatted version of the description to tooling like
[terraform-plugin-docs](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-docs). It
is a best practice to only alter the formatting, not the content, between the
`Description` and `MarkdownDescription`.

At the moment, if the `MarkdownDescription` property is set it will always be
used instead of the `Description` property. It is possible that a different strategy may be employed in the future to surface descriptions to other tooling in a different format, so we recommend specifying both fields.

## Attributes

Attributes are the main point of a schema. They are used to describe the fields
of a provider, resource, or data source. Attributes are defined as a map of
[`tfsdk.Attribute`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-framework/tfsdk#Attribute)s,
with string keys.

The keys are the names of the fields, and should only contain lowercase
letters, numbers, and underscores. Practitioners will enter these strings in
the configuration block of the provider, resource, or data source to set a
value for that field.

The values are descriptions of the constraints on that field and the metadata
about it, expressed as a `tfsdk.Attribute` struct value.

### Type

The `Type` property of a `tfsdk.Attribute` is used to specify the [attribute
type](/plugin/framework/types) of the attribute. If the practitioner
enters data of the wrong type, Terraform will automatically return a validation
error to the practitioner, and this type determines what kind of attribute
value is used when [accessing state, config, and plan
values](/plugin/framework/accessing-values).

You must specify one of the `Type` and `Attributes` properties of
`tfsdk.Attribute`. You cannot specify both.

### Attributes

The `Attributes` property of a `tfsdk.Attribute` is used to specify the
attribute's nested attributes. Nested attributes are attributes that are
grouped beneath another attribute:

```tf
resource "example_foo" "bar" {
  nested_attribute = {
    hello = "world"
    demo = true
  }
}
```

In this example, `hello` and `demo` are nested attributes of the
`nested_attribute` attribute. Nested attributes have their own computed,
optional, required, and sensitive flags, and their own properties to hold
descriptions, markdown-formatted descriptions, and deprecation messages.

If an attribute is required and its nested attribute is optional, the attribute
must be specified, and the nested attribute can be omitted inside the curly
braces. If an attribute is optional and its nested attribute is required, the
attribute can be omitted, but if it is specified, the nested attribute must be
specified as well.

If an attribute is computed, all its nested attributes are considered computed,
as well. Likewise, if an attribute is considered sensitive or deprecated, all
its nested attributes are considered sensitive or deprecated.

You must specify one of the `Type` and `Attributes` properties of
`tfsdk.Attribute`. You cannot specify both.

-> **Note**: We recommend using an attribute with nested attributes when any of the inner fields should have their own flags or metadata (required, optional, computed, deprecated, sensitive, descriptions, etc.).  If the attribute is an atomic unit, we recommend using an object or list of objects instead.

#### SingleNestedAttributes

When the `Attributes` property of a `tfsdk.Attribute` is set to the
[`schema.SingleNestedAttributes`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-framework/schema#SingleNestedAttributes)
type, the nested attributes behave like an object. There can only be one group
of the nested attributes.

```tf
resource "example_foo" "bar" {
  nested_attribute = {
    hello = "world"
    demo = true
  }
}
```

#### ListNestedAttributes

When the `Attributes` property of a `tfsdk.Attribute` is set to the
[`schema.ListNestedAttributes`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-framework/schema#ListNestedAttributes)
type, the nested attributes behave like a list of objects. The practitioner can
specify any number of groups of these attributes.

```tf
resource "example_foo" "bar" {
  nested_attribute = [
    {
      hello = "world"
      demo = true
    },
    {
      hello = "moon"
      demo = false
    },
  ]
}
```

In addition to a map of the attributes, `ListNestedAttributes` accepts a
[`schema.ListNestedAttributesOptions`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-framework/schema#ListNestedAttributesOptions)
struct that can be used to specify a minimum or maximum number of instances of
that group of fields. If the user enters fewer than or more than those numbers
of groups, Terraform will automatically return a validation error.

#### MapNestedAttributes

When the `Attributes` property of a `tfsdk.Attribute` is set to the
[`schema.MapNestedAttributes`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-framework/schema#MapNestedAttributes)
type, the nested attributes behave like a map of objects. The practitioner can
specify any number of groups of these attributes, with string keys associated
with each group.

```tf
resource "example_foo" "bar" {
  nested_attribute = {
    "red" = {
      hello = "world"
      demo = true
    },
    "blue" = {
      hello = "moon"
      demo = false
    },
  }
}
```

In addition to a map of the attributes, `MapNestedAttributes` accepts a
[`schema.MapNestedAttributesOptions`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-framework/schema#MapNestedAttributesOptions)
struct that can be used to specify a minimum or maximum number of instances of
that group of fields. If the user enters fewer than or more than those numbers
of groups, Terraform will automatically return a validation error.

### Required

Setting the `Required` property to `true` indicates that the attribute is
required. Practitioners will be automatically given a validation error if they
omit the attribute in their configuration.

Attributes that set `Required` to `true` cannot set `Optional` or `Computed` to
`true`.

### Optional

Setting the `Optional` property to `true` indicates that the attribute is
optional. Practitioners are free to specify that attribute or omit it, and
Terraform will not automatically generate a validation error based on the
presence or absence of that attribute.

Attributes that set `Optional` to `true` cannot set `Required` to `true`, but
may set `Computed` to `true`, in which case the behavior of `Computed` applies,
too.

### Computed

Setting the `Computed` property to `true` indicates that the attribute can be
set by the provider. Any attribute that does not have `Computed` set to `true`
cannot be influenced by the provider; it can only be changed via the config or
via state refreshing.

If `Computed` is set to `true` and `Optional` is not set to `true`, the
attribute will be considered read-only and Terraform will automatically
generate a validation error if the practitioner attempts to enter a
configuration value for that attribute.

If `Computed` is set to `true` and `Optional` is set to `true`, Terraform will
not do any validation on the presence or absence of the value.

If `Computed` is set to `true`, `Required` must not be set to `true`.

Because providers don't set provider configuration values in state, provider
schemas should never set `Computed` to `true`.

### Sensitive

Setting the `Sensitive` property to `true` indicates to Terraform that the
value should always be considered
[sensitive](/language/state/sensitive-data). This does not at this
time add any encryption or otherwise hide the value from Terraform; see [the
documentation for SDKv2](/plugin/sdkv2/best-practices/sensitive-state) for
more information on sensitive state and Terraform. It does, however, hide the
value in Terraform's outputs and in Terraform Cloud.

### Description

Much like [resources, data sources, and providers can have a
description](#description), so too can individual attributes.

### MarkdownDescription

Much like [resources, data sources, and providers can have a markdown-formatted
description](#markdowndescription), so too can individual attributes.

### DeprecationMessage

Much like [resources, data sources, and providers can be
deprecated](#deprecationmessage), so too can individual attributes.
